son of the University of Michigan has demonstrated that the relationship of motivation to expectancy varies in the form of a bell-shaped curve (see the exhibit).2 The degree of motivation and effort rises until the expectancy of success reaches 50%, then begins to fall even though the expectancy of success con- tinues to increase. No motivation or response is aroused when the goal is perceived as being either virtually certain or virtually impossible to attain. Moreover, as Berlew and Hall have pointed out, if subordinates fail to meet performance expectations that are close to their own level of aspirations, they will lower personal performance goals and stan- dards, performance will tend to drop off, and nega- tive attitudes will develop toward the activity or job.3 It is therefore not surprising that failure of sub- ordinates to meet the unrealistically high expecta- tions of their managers leads to high rates of attri- tion, either voluntary or involuntary. Secret of Superiority. Something takes place in the minds of superior managers that does not occur in the minds of those who are less effective. While superior managers are consistently able to create high performance expectations that their subordi- nates fulfill, weaker managers are not successful in obtaining a similar response. What accounts for the difference? The answer, in part, seems to be that superior managers have greater confidence than other man- agers in their own ability to develop the talents of their subordinates. Contrary to what might be as- sumed, the high expectations of superior managers are based primarily on what they think about them- selves – about their own ability to select, train, and motivate their subordinates. What managers be- lieve about themselves subtly influences what they believe about their subordinates, what they expect of them, and how they treat them. If they have con- fidence in their ability to develop and stimulate them to high levels of performance, they will ex- pect much of them and will treat them with confi- dence that their expectations will be met. But if they have doubts about their ability to stimulate them, they will expect less of them and will treat them with less confidence. Stated in another way, the superior managers’ record of success and their confidence in their abili- ty give their high expectations credibility. As a con- sequence, their subordinates accept these expecta- tions as realistic and try hard to achieve them. The importance of what a manager believes about his or her training and motivational ability is illustrated by “Sweeney’s Miracle,” a managerial and educational self-fulfilling prophecy. James Sweeney taught industrial management and psychiatry at Tulane University, and he also was responsible for the operation of the Biomedical Computer Center there. Sweeney believed that he could teach even a poorly educated man to be a ca- pable computer operator. George Johnson, a former hospital porter, became janitor at the computer center; he was chosen by Sweeney to prove his con- viction. In the mornings, George Johnson per- formed his janitorial duties, and in the afternoons Sweeney taught him about computers. Johnson was learning a great deal about comput- ers when someone at the university concluded that to be a computer operator one had to have a certain I.Q. score. Johnson was tested, and his I.Q. indicated that he would not be able to learn to type, much less operate a computer. But Sweeney was not convinced. He threatened to quit unless Johnson was permitted to learn to program and operate the computer. Sweeney prevailed, and he is still running the computer center. Johnson is now in charge of the main computer room and is responsible for training new employees to program and operate the computer.4 Sweeney’s expectations were based on what he believed about his own teaching ability, not on Johnson’s learning credentials. What managers be- lieve about their ability to train and motivate sub- ordinates clearly is the foundation on which realis- tically high managerial expectations are built. 

 Retrospective Commentary

 Self-fulfilling managerial prophecies were a bit mysterious when I documented the phenomenon 19 years ago. At that time, the powerful influence of managers’ expectations on the development, moti- vation, and performance of their subordinates was not widely understood. Since then, however, the “Pygmalion effect” has become well known. Recent research has confirmed that effective leaders have the ability to create high performance expectations that their employees fulfill. Every manager should understand, therefore, how the Pygmalion effect works. What managers think about themselves and their abilities, as I explained in “Pygmalion In Manage- ment,” is crucial to their effec- tiveness in creating self-fulfilling prophecies. Warren Bennis and Burt Nanus recently reached a similar conclusion after conduct- ing some 90 interviews with CEOs and top public administra- tors. They wrote: “Our study of ef- fective leaders strongly suggested that a key factor was…what we’re calling…positive self-regard. …Positive self-regard seems to ex- ert its force by creating in others a sense of confidence and high ex- pectations, not very different from the fabled Pygmalion effect.”* The way managers develop confidence in their abilities and transmit their feelings of efficacy to their employees is illustrated by the success of Lee A. Iacocca of Chrysler – whom, interestingly, Bennis and Nanus used as a model for their theory of leader- ship. Iacocca’s self-assurance can be traced to his prior success as president of Ford. His subsequent prophecy that Chrysler would be saved was accepted as credible by Chrysler’s employees because they saw him as a competent automobile executive. They tried hard to meet his expectations and “behaved as they believed they were expected to,” which my article indicated would be normal under the circumstances. It is highly unlikely, however, that Iacocca could have saved Chrysler if he had been an industry out- sider who needed two or three years to learn the auto- motive business. If he had been an outsider, he could not have moved decisively to do what needed to be done, nor could he have created a strong sense of confidence and high expectations among Chrysler’s employees. His success was due to his experience and competence. It is doubtful that a prophecy by a less- qualified executive would have been self-fulfilling. So the message for managers is this: to be a Pygmalion, you must acquire the industry knowledge and job skills required to be confident of your high expecta- tions and to make them credible to your employees. Your organization can help identify the knowledge and skills you need to perform your job effectively. Your supervisors can give you assignments that will spur your development. But you must assume respon- sibility for your own development and career growth. A word of caution may be in order, however. As I explained in my article, managers often un- intentionally communicate low expectations to their subordinates, even though they believe other- wise. When they communicate low expectations, they become “negative” Pygmalions who un- dermine the self-confidence of their employees and reduce their effectiveness. Managers must be extremely sensitive, therefore, to their own behavior and its impact on their subordinates. They must guard against treating their em- ployees in ways that lower their feelings of efficacy and self-esteem and are unproductive. If I were writing “Pygmalion in Management” to- day, I might focus more attention on the problems of the negative Pygmalions because there are more of them than positive Pygmalions in U.S. industry. But the dark side of the Pygmalion effect is distressing, and I prefer to think about the bright side. It is a hopeful concept that can help all managers become more effective. The difference between employees who perform well and those who perform poorly is not how they are paid but how they are treated. All managers can learn how to treat their employees in ways that will lead to mutual expectations of superior performance. The most effective managers always do. 

 The Critical Early Years

 Managerial expectations have their most magical influence on young people. As subordinates mature and gain experience, their self-image gradually hardens, and they begin to see themselves as their career records imply. Their own aspirations and the expectations of their superiors become increas- ingly controlled by the “reality” of their past perfor- mance. It becomes more and more difficult for them and for their managers to generate mutually high expectations unless they have outstanding records. Incidentally, the same pattern occurs in school. Rosenthal’s experiments with educational self-ful- filling prophecies consistently demonstrate that teachers’ expectations are more effective in influ- encing intellectual growth in younger children than in older children. In the lower grade levels, particularly in the first and second grades, the ef- fects of teachers’ expectations are dramatic. In the upper grade levels, teachers’ prophecies seem to have little effect on children’s intellectual growth, although they do affect their motivation and atti- tude toward school. While the declining influence of teachers’ expectations cannot be completely ex- plained, it is reasonable to conclude that younger children are more malleable, have fewer fixed notions about their abilities, and have less well-estab- lished reputations in the schools. As they grow, par- ticularly if they are assigned to “tracks” on the basis of their records, as is now often done in public schools, their beliefs about their intellectual ability and their teachers’ expectations of them begin to harden and become more resistant to influence by others. Key to Future Performance. The early years in a business organization, when young people can be strongly influenced by managerial expectations, are critical in determining future performance and ca- reer progress. This is shown by a study at AT&T. Berlew and Hall found that what the company initially expected of 49 college graduates who were management-level employees was the most critical factor in their subsequent performance and suc- cess. The researchers concluded that the correla- tion between how much a company expects of an employee in the first year and how much that em- ployee contributes during the next five years was “too compelling to be ignored.”5 Subsequently, the two men studied the career records of 18 college graduates who were hired as management trainees in another of AT&T’s operat- ing companies. Again they found that both expecta- tions and performance in the first year correlated consistently with later performance and success. “Something important is happening in the first year...,” Berlew and Hall concluded. “Meeting high company expectations in the critical first year leads to the internalization of positive job attitudes and high standards; these attitudes and standards, in turn, would first lead to and be reinforced by strong performance and success in later years. It should also follow that a new manager who meets the chal- lenge of one highly demanding job will be given subsequently a more demanding job, and his level of contribution will rise as he responds to the com- pany’s growing expectations of him. The key...is the concept of the first year as a critical period for learning, a time when the trainee is uniquely ready to develop or change in the direction of the compa- ny’s expectations.”6 Most Influential Boss. A young person’s first manager is likely to be the most influential in that person’s career. If managers are unable or unwilling to develop the skills young employees need to per- form effectively, the latter will set lower personal standards than they are capable of achieving, their self-images will be impaired, and they will develop negative attitudes toward jobs, employers, and – in all probability – their own careers in business. Since the chances of building successful careers with these first employers will decline rapidly, the em- ployees will leave, if they have high aspirations, in hope of finding better opportunities. If, on the other hand, early managers help employees achieve max- imum potential, they will build the foundations for successful careers. With few exceptions, the most effective branch managers at a large West Coast bank were mature people in their forties and fifties. The bank’s execu- tives explained that it took considerable time for a person to gain the knowledge, experience, and judg- ment required to handle properly credit risks, cus- tomer relations, and employee relations. One branch manager, however, ranked in the top 10% of the managers in terms of effectiveness (which included branch profit growth, deposit growth, scores on administrative audits, and sub- jective rankings by superiors), was only 27 years old. This young person had been made a branch manager at 25, and in two years had improved not only the performance of the branch substantially but also developed a younger assistant manager who, in turn, was made a branch manager at 25. The assistant had had only average grades in col- lege, but in just four years at the bank had been as- signed to work with two branch managers who were remarkably effective teachers. The first boss, who was recognized throughout the bank for unusual skill in developing young people, did not believe that it took years to gain the knowledge and skill needed to become an effective banker. After two years, the young person was made assistant manag- er at a branch headed by another executive, who also was an effective developer of subordinates. Thus it was that the young person, when promoted to head a branch, confidently followed the model of two pre- vious superiors in operating the branch, quickly es- tablished a record of outstanding performance, and trained an assistant to assume responsibility early. For confirming evidence of the crucial role played by a person’s first bosses, let us turn to selling, since performance in this area is more easily mea- sured than in most managerial areas. Consider the following investigations: M In a study of the careers of 100 insurance sales- people who began work with either highly compe- tent or less-than-competent agency managers, the Life Insurance Agency Management Association found that those with average sales-aptitude test scores were nearly five times as likely to succeed under managers with good performance records as under managers with poor records, and those with superior sales aptitude scores were found to be twice as likely to succeed under high-performing managers as under low-performing managers.7 M The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company deter- mined in 1960 that differences in the productivity of new insurance agents who had equal sales apti- tudes could be accounted for only by differences in the ability of managers in the offices to which they were assigned. Agents whose productivity was high in relation to their aptitude test scores invariably were employed in offices that had production records among the top third in the company. Con- versely, those whose productivity was low in rela- tion to their test scores typically were in the least successful offices. After analyzing all the factors that might have accounted for these variations, the company concluded that differences in the perfor- mance of new agents were due primarily to differ- ences in the “proficiency in sales training and direc- tion” of the local managers. A study I conducted of the performance of auto- mobile salespeople in Ford dealerships in New Eng- land revealed that superior salespersons were con- centrated in a few outstanding dealerships. For instance, 10 of the top 15 salespeople in New Eng- land were in 3 (out of approximately 200) of the dealerships in this region, and 5 of the top 15 people were in one highly successful dealership. Yet 4 of these people previously had worked for other deal- ers without achieving outstanding sales records. There was little doubt that the training and motiva- tional skills of managers in the outstanding dealer- ships were critical. Astute Selection. While success in bu