siness sometimes appears to depend on the luck of the draw, more than luck is involved when a young per- son is selected by a superior manager. Successful managers do not pick their subordinates at random or by the toss of a coin. They are careful to select only those who they “know” will succeed. As Metropolitan’s Rockaway district manager, Alfred Oberlander, insisted: “Every man or woman who starts with us is going to be a top-notch life insur- ance agent, or he or she would not have been asked to join the team.” When pressed to explain how they “know” whether a person will be successful, superior man- agers usually end up by saying something like, “The qualities are intangible, but I know them when I see them.” They have difficulty being ex- plicit because their selection process is intuitive and is based on interpersonal intelligence that is difficult to describe. The key seems to be that they are able to identify subordinates with whom they can probably work effectively – people with whom they are compatible and whose body chemistry agrees with their own. They make mistakes, of course. But they “give up” on a subordinate slowly because that means “giving up” on themselves – on their judgment and ability in selecting, training, and motivating people. Less effective managers se- lect subordinates more quickly and give up on them more easily, believing that the inadequacy is that of the subordinate, not of themselves. 

  Developing Young People

 Observing that his company’s research indicates that “initial corporate expectations for perfor- mance (with real responsibility) mold subsequent expectations and behavior,” R.W. Walters, Jr., direc- tor of college employment at AT&T, contends that “initial bosses of new college hires must be the best in the organization.” 9 Unfortunately, however, most companies practice exactly the opposite. Rarely do new graduates work closely with expe- rienced middle managers or upper-level executives. Normally they are bossed by first-line managers who tend to be the least experienced and least effec- tive in the organization. While there are excep- tions, first-line managers generally are either “old pros” who have been judged as lacking competence for higher levels of responsibility, or they are younger people who are making the transition from “doing” to “managing.” Often these managers lack the knowledge and skill required to develop the productive capabilities of their subordinates. As a consequence, many college graduates begin their careers in business under the worst possible cir- cumstances. Since they know their abilities are not being developed or used, they quite naturally soon become negative toward their jobs, employers, and business careers. Although most top executives have not yet diag- nosed the problem, industry’s greatest challenge by far is to rectify the underdevelopment, underuti- lization, and ineffective management and use of its most valuable resource – its young managerial and professional talent. Disillusion and Turnover. The problem posed to corporate management is underscored by the sharply rising rates of attrition among young man- agerial and professional personnel. Turnover among managers one to five years out of college is almost twice as high now as it was a decade ago, and five times as high as two decades ago. Three out of five companies surveyed by Fortune magazine in the fall of 1968 reported that turnover rates among young managers and professionals were higher than five years ago.10 While the high level of economic activity and the shortage of skilled personnel have made job- hopping easier, the underlying caus- es of high attrition, I am convinced, are underdevelopment and underuti- lization of a work force that has high career aspirations. The problem can be seen in its ex- treme form in the excessive attri- tion rates of college and university graduates who begin their careers in sales positions. Whereas the average company loses about 50% of its new col- lege and university graduates within three to five years, attrition rates as high as 40% in the first year are common among college graduates who accept sales positions in the average company. This attri- tion stems primarily, in my opinion, from the fail- ure of first-line managers to teach new college re- cruits what they need to know to be effective sales representatives. As we have seen, young people who begin their careers working for less-than-competent sales man- agers are likely to have records of low productivity. When rebuffed by their customers and considered by their managers to have little potential for suc- cess, the young people naturally have great difficul- ty in maintaining their self-esteem. Soon they find little personal satisfaction in their jobs and, to avoid further loss of self-respect, leave their em- ployers for jobs that look more promising. More- over, as reports about the high turnover and disillu- sionment of those who embarked on sales careers filter back to college campuses, new graduates be- come increasingly reluctant to take jobs in sales. Thus ineffective first-line sales management sets off a sequence of events that ends with college and university graduates avoiding careers in selling. To a lesser extent, the same pattern is duplicated in other functions of business, as evidenced by the growing trend of college graduates to pursue careers in “more meaningful” occupations, such as teach- ing and government service. A serious “generation gap” between bosses and subordinates is another significant cause of break- down. Many managers resent the abstract, academ- ic language and narrow rationalization characteris- tically used by recent graduates. As one manager expressed it to me, “For God’s sake, you need a lexicon even to talk with these kids.” Nondegreed managers often are particularly resentful, perhaps because they feel threatened by the bright young people with book-learned knowledge that they do not understand. For whatever reason, the “generation gap” in many companies is eroding managerial expecta- tions of new college graduates. For instance, I know of a survey of management attitudes in one of the nation’s largest companies that revealed that 54% of its first-line and second-line managers believed that new college recruits were “not as good as they were five years ago.” Since what managers expect of subordinates influences the way they treat them, it is understandable that new graduates often develop negative attitudes toward their jobs and their em- ployers. Clearly, low managerial expectations and hostile attitudes are not the basis for effective man- agement of new people entering business. Industry has not developed effective first-line managers fast enough to meet its needs. As a conse- quence, many companies are underdeveloping their most valuable resource – talented young men and women. They are incurring heavy attrition costs and contributing to the negative attitudes young people often have about careers in business. For top executives in industry who are concerned with the productivity of their organizations and the careers of young employees, the challenge is clear: to speed the development of managers who will treat subordinates in ways that lead to high performance and career satisfaction. Managers not only shape the expectations and productivity of their subordinates but also influence their attitudes toward their jobs and themselves. If managers are unskilled, they leave scars on the careers of young people, cut deeply into their self-esteem, and dis- tort their image of themselves as human beings. But if they are skillful and have high expectations subordinates’ self-confidence will grow, their capa- bilities will develop, and their productivity will be high. More often than one realizes, the manager is Pygmalion