

Pygmalion in Management

 In George Bernard Shaw’s Pygmalion, Eliza Doolittle explains: “You see, really and truly, apart from the things anyone can pick up (the dressing and the proper way of speaking, and so on), the difference between a lady and a flower girl is not how she be- haves but how she’s treated. I shall always be a flower girl to Professor Higgins because he always treats me as a flower girl and always will; but I know I can be a lady to you because you always treat me as a lady and always will.” Pygmalion was a sculptor in Greek mythology who carved a statue of a beautiful woman that subsequently was brought to life. The notion that one person can transform another is the basis for this “classic” article. At the time he wrote it for the July-August 1969 issue, J. Sterling Livingston was a professor of business admin- istration at the Harvard Business School. He had found- ed the Sterling Institute, a management consulting firm, in 1967. He is now chairman of the Washington, D.C.- based institute, which specializes in executive training and development. Some managers always treat their subordinates in a way that leads to superior performance. But most managers, like Professor Higgins, unintentionally treat their subordinates in a way that leads to lower performance than they are capable of achieving. The way managers treat their subordinates is subtly in- fluenced by what they expect of them. If managers’ expectations are high, productivity is likely to be ex- cellent. If their expectations are low, productivity is likely to be poor. It is as though there were a law that caused subordinates’ performance to rise or fall to meet managers’ expectations. The powerful influence of one person’s expecta- tions on another’s behavior has long been recognized by physicians and behavioral scientists and, more re- cently, by teachers. But heretofore the importance of managerial expectations for individual and group performance has not been widely understood. I have documented this phenomenon in a number of case studies prepared during the past decade for major in- dustrial concerns. These cases and other evidence available from scientific research now reveal: M What managers expect of their subordinates and the way they treat them largely determine their performance and career progress. M A unique characteristic of superior managers is the ability to create high performance expectations that subordinates fulfill. M Less effective managers fail to develop similar ex- pectations, and as a consequence, the productivity of their subordinates suffers. M Subordinates, more often than not, appear to do what they believe they are expected to do. 

 Impact on Productivity

 One of the most comprehensive illustrations of the effect of managerial expectations on productivi- ty is recorded in studies of the organizational exper- iment undertaken in 1961 by Alfred Oberlander, manager of the Rockaway district office of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. He had ob- served that outstanding insurance agencies grew faster than average or poor agencies and that new insurance agents performed better in outstanding agencies than in average or poor agencies, regard- less of their sales aptitude. He decided, therefore, to group his superior agents in one unit to stimulate their performance and to provide a challenging en- vironment in which to introduce new salespeople. Accordingly, Oberlander assigned his six best agents to work with his best assistant manager, an equal number of average producers to work with an average assistant manager, and the remaining low producers to work with the least able manager. He then asked the su- perior group to produce two-thirds of the premium volume achieved by the entire agency during the previ- ous year. He describes the results as follows: “Shortly after this selection had been made, the people in the agency began referring to this select group as a ‘superstaff’ because of their high esprit de corps in operating so well as a unit. Their production efforts over the first 12 weeks far surpassed our most optimistic expec- tations...proving that groups of people of sound ability can be motivated beyond their apparently normal productive capacities when the problems created by the poor producer are eliminated from the operation. “Thanks to this fine result, our overall agency performance improved by 40% and it remained at this figure. “In the beginning of 1962 when, through expan- sion, we appointed another assistant manager and assigned him a staff, we again used this same con- cept, arranging the agents once more according to their productive capacity. “The assistant managers were assigned...accord- ing to their ability, with the most capable assistant manager receiving the best group, thus playing strength to strength. Our agency overall production again improved by about 25% to 30%, and so this staff arrangement remained in place until the end of the year. “Now in this year of 1963, we found upon analy- sis that there were so many agents...with a poten- tial of half a million dollars or more that only one staff remained of those people in the agency who were not considered to have any chance of reaching the half-million-dollar mark.” Although the productivity of the “superstaff” im- proved dramatically, it should be pointed out that the productivity of those in the lowest unit, “who were not considered to have any chance of reaching the half-million-dollar mark,” actually declined, and that attrition among them increased. The per- formance of the superior agents rose to meet their managers’ expectations, while that of the weaker ones declined as predicted. Self-Fulfilling Prophecies. The “average” unit, however, proved to be an anomaly. Although the district manager expected only average perfor- mance from this group, its productivity increased significantly. This was because the assistant man- ager in charge of the group refused to believe that she was less capable than the manager of the super- staff or that the agents in the top group had any greater ability than the agents in her group. She in- sisted in discussions with her agents that every per- son in the middle group had greater potential than those in the superstaff, lacking only their years of experience in selling insurance. She stimulated her agents to accept the challenge of outperforming the superstaff. As a result, in each year the middle group increased its productivity by a higher percentage than the superstaff did (although it never attained the dollar volume of the top group). It is of special interest that the self-image of the manager of the “average” unit did not permit her to accept others’ treatment of her as an “average” manager, just as Eliza Doolittle’s image of herself as a lady did not permit her to accept others’ treat- ment of her as a flower girl. The assistant manager transmitted her own strong feelings of efficacy to her agents, created mutual expectancy of high per- formance, and greatly stimulated productivity. Comparable results occurred when a similar ex- periment was made at another office of the compa- ny. Further confirmation comes from a study of the early managerial success of 49 college graduates who were management-level employees of an oper- ating company of AT&T. David E. Berlew and Douglas T. Hall of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology examined the career progress of these managers over a period of five years and discovered that their relative success, as measured by salary in- creases and the company’s estimate of each one’s performance and potential, depended largely on the company’s expectations of them. The influence of one person’s expectations on an- other’s behavior is by no means a business discov- ery. More than half a century ago, Albert Moll con- cluded from his clinical experience that subjects behaved as they believed they were expected to. The phenomenon he observed, in which “the prophecy causes its own fulfillment,” has recently become a subject of considerable scientific interest. For example: M In a series of scientific experiments, Robert Rosenthal of Harvard University has demonstrated that a “teacher’s expectation for a pupil’s intellec- tual competence can come to serve as an education- al self-fulfilling prophecy.” M An experiment in a summer Headstart program for 60 preschoolers compared the performance of pupils under (a) teachers who had been led to expect relatively slow learning by their children, and (b) teachers who had been led to believe that their chil- dren had excellent intellectual ability and learning capacity. Pupils of the second group of teachers learned much faster.1 Moreover, the healing professions have long rec- ognized that a physician’s or psychiatrist’s expecta- tions can have a formidable influence on a patient’s physical or mental health. What takes place in the minds of the patients and the healers, particularly when they have congruent expectations, may deter- mine the outcome. For instance, the havoc of a doc- tor’s pessimistic prognosis has often been observed. Again, it is well known that the efficacy of a new drug or a new treatment can be greatly influenced by the physician’s expectations – a result referred to by the medical profession as a “placebo effect.” Pattern of Failure. When salespersons are treated by their managers as superpeople, as the superstaff was at the Metropolitan Rockaway district office, they try to live up to that image and do what they know supersalespersons are expected to do. But when the agents with poor productivity records are treated by their managers as not having “any chance” of success, as the low producers at Rockaway were, this negative expectation also becomes a manageri- al self-fulfilling prophecy. Unsuccessful salespersons have great difficulty maintaining their self-image and self-esteem. In re- sponse to low managerial expectations, they typi- cally attempt to prevent additional damage to their egos by avoiding situations that might lead to greater failure. They either reduce the number of sales calls they make or avoid trying to “close” sales when that might result in further painful re- jection, or both. Low expectations and damaged egos lead them to behave in a manner that increases the probability of failure, thereby fulfilling their managers’ expectations. Let me illustrate: Not long ago I studied the effectiveness of branch bank managers at a West Coast bank with over 500 branches. The managers who had had their lending authority reduced because of high rates of loss be- came progressively less effective. To prevent further loss of authority, they turned to making only “safe” loans. This action resulted in losses of business to competing banks and a relative decline in both de- posits and profits at their branches. Then, to reverse that decline in deposits and earnings, they often “reached” for loans and became almost irrational in their acceptance of questionable credit risks. Their actions were not so much a matter of poor judgment as an expression of their willingness to take desper- ate risks in the hope of being able to avoid further damage to their egos and to their careers. Thus, in response to the low expectations of their supervisors who had reduced their lending authori- ty, they behaved in a manner that led to larger cred- it losses. They appeared to do what they believed they were expected to do, and their supervisors’ ex- pectations became self-fulfilling prophecies. 

 Power of Expectations

 Managers cannot avoid the depressing cycle of events that flow from low expectations merely by hiding their feelings from subordinates. If managers believe subordinates will perform poorly, it is virtu- ally impossible for them to mask their expectations because the message usually is communicated unin- tentionally, without conscious action on their part. Indeed, managers often communicate most when they believe they are communicating least. For in- stance, when they say nothing – become cold and uncommunicative – it usually is a sign that they are displeased by a subordinate or believe that he or she is hopeless. The silent treatment communicates negative feelings even more effectively, at times, than a tongue-lashing does. What seems to be criti- cal in the communication of expectations is not what the boss says so much as the way he or she behaves. Indifferent and noncommital treatment, more often than not, is the kind of treatment that communicates low expectations and leads to poor performance. Common Illusions. Managers are more effective in communicating low expectations to their sub- ordinates than in communicating high expecta- tions to them, even though most managers believe exactly the opposite. It usually is astonishingly dif- ficult for them to recognize the clarity with which they transmit negative feelings. To illustrate again: M The Rockaway district manager vigorously de- nied that he had communicated low expectations to the agents in the poorest group who, he believed, did not have “any chance” of becoming high pro- ducers. Yet the message was clearly received by those agents. A typical case was that of an agent who resigned from the low unit. When the district manager told the agent that he was sorry she was leaving, the agent replied, “No you’re not; you’re glad.” Although the district manager previously had said nothing to her, he had unintentionally communicated his low expectations to his agents through his indifferent manner. Subsequently, the agents who were assigned to the lowest unit inter- preted the assignment as equivalent to a request for their resignation. M One of the company’s agency managers estab- lished superior, average, and low units, even though he was convinced that he had no superior or out- standing subordinates. “All my assistant managers and agents are either average or incompetent,” he explained to the Rockaway district manager. Al- though he tried to duplicate the Rockaway results, his low opinions of his agents were communicated – not so subtly – to them. As a result, the experi- ment failed. Positive feelings, on the other hand, often do not come through clearly enough. Another insurance agency manager copied the organizational changes made at the Rockaway district office, grouping the salespeople she rated highly with the best manager, the average salespeople with an average manager,and so on. Improvement, however, did not result from the move. The Rockaway district manager therefore investigated the situation. He discovered that the assistant manager in charge of the high- performance unit was unaware that his manager considered him to be the best. In fact, he and the other agents doubted that the agency manager really believed there was any difference in their abilities. This agency manager was a stolid, phleg- matic, unemotional woman who treated her agents in a rather pedestrian way. Since high expectations had not been communicated to them, they did not understand the reason for the new organization and could not see any point in it. Clearly, the way man- agers treat subordinates, not the way they organize them, is the key to high expectations and high productivity. Impossible Dreams. Managerial expectations must pass the test of reality before they can be translated into performance. To become self-fulfill- ing prophecies, expectations must be made of sterner stuff than the power of positive thinking or generalized confidence in one’s subordinates – help- ful as these concepts may be for some other purpos- es. Subordinates will not be motivated to reach high levels of productivity unless they consider the boss’s high expectations realistic and achievable. If they are encouraged to strive for unattainable goals, they eventually give up trying and settle for results that are lower than they are capable of achieving. The experience of a large electrical manufacturing company demonstrates this; the company discov- ered that production actually declined if production quotas were set too high, because the workers sim- ply stopped trying to meet them. In other words, the practice of “dangling the carrot just beyond the donkey’s reach,” endorsed by many managers, is not a good motivational device. Scientific research by David C. McClelland of Harvard University and John W. Atkin